						AIR					SMOKE
CLIMATE/TERRAIN:		Any					Any
FREQUENCY:				Common				Common
ORGANIZATION:			solitary			Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE:			Any					Any
DIET:					Nil					Special
INTELLIGENCE:			Average (8- 10)		Average (8- 10)
TREASURE:				N					Nil
ALIGNMENT:				Neutral				Neutral
NO. APPEARING:			1-10				1-10
ARMOR CLASS:			4					4
MOVEMENT:				12, f1 24 (A)		12, F1 24 (B)
HIT DICE:				3					3
THACO:					17					17
NO. OF ATTACKS:			2					2
DAMAGE/ATTACK:			1d3 / 1d3			1d2 / 1d2
SPECIAL ATTACKS:		See below			See helow
SPECIADLE FENSES:		See below			See helow
MAGIC resistance:		Nil					Nil
SIZE:					M (5'tall)			M (5'tall)
MORALE:					Average (8-10)		Average (8-10)
XP VALUE:				420					420

AIR mephit
Most maneuverable in flight of all mephits, air mephits are
flighty in personality as well. Fickle, untrustworthy, and
empty-headed, these mephits make excellent messengers and
couriers - for their first mission. Thereafter they flee their creators
to explore the planes, attach themselves to whomever
looks interesting and make entertaining trouble.
Air mephits look like pure white muscular humanoids
from the waist up and white tornadoes from the waist down.
Unlike most other mephits, they have no wings but fly on
their airstreams; they display astonishing agility. They are
bald with broad grins and small ears, and they often wear one
gold earring.
COMBAT: Air mephits favor sudden ambush attacks and quick
escapes. An air mephit attacks with two claws (Id3 damage
each). To use its breath weapon, the mephit inhales sand, dirt,
or other particles in the vicinity and then blows the grit at
high velocity at one target within 10’ (hits automatically for
ld6 damage). The mephit can blow once every other round
3rd level of magic use. Once per day they can cast gus
wind.
Once per hour an air mephit can attempt to gate
another air mephit. They avoid this unless pressed, becau
they dislike one another.
Air mephits are immune to air and gas attacks of al
kinds. They regenerate 1 hp per turn automatically. They die
instantly and vanish in a vacuum.
ECOLOGYA: confined mephit can freshen and cool the air in
stuffy rooms. Spellcasters unaccustomed to hot weather sometimes
bring them along on trips to hot Lower Planes.

smoke mephit
Smoke mephits are crude and lazy. They spend most of their
time sitting around invisible, smoking pipeweed, telling had
jokes about their creators, and generally shirking their responsibilities.
combat: A smoke rnephit's two clawed hands cause 1d2 damage
each. Its breath weapon consists of a sooty hall usable
every other melee round, an unlimited number of times per
day. This sooty hall automatically strikes one creature of the
mephit's choice within 20’ (d1adm4a ge and blinded for 1-2
rounds), no saving throw.
Smoke mephits can cast invisibility and dancing lights
once each per day. Once per hour, they can attempt to gate in
1-2 other mephits, fire, magma, smoke, or steam. If two
rnephits arrive, they are the same type.
Contact with any kind of smoke lets a smoke rnephit
regenerate 1 hp per turn. When a smoke mephit dies, it disappears
in a flash of flame. This flash causes 1 hp damage to all
creatures within 10’
ECOLOGY: ower-planar beings traditionally dispatch a smoke
mephit as a gift to enemies, a gesture of insolence and contempt
that amounts to a declaration of vendetta.

						EARTH				OOZE
CLIMATE/TERRAIN:		Any					Any
FREQUENCY:				Common				Common
ORGANIZATION:			Solitary			Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE:			Any					Any
DIET:					Special				Special
TREASURE:				N					N x2
ALIGNMENT:				Nutral				Neutral
INTELLIGENCE:			Average (8-10)		Average (8-10)
NO. APPEARING:			
ARMOR CLASS:			
MOVEMENT:				
HIT DICE:				
THACO:					
NO. OF ATTACKS:			
DAMAGE/ATtACK:			
SPECIAL ATTACKS:		
SPECIAL DEFENSES:		
SIZE:					
MAGICRE SISTANCE:		
MORALE:					
XP VALUE:				
1-10
5
12, FI 24 (C)
3+2
17
2
1 d4/ 1 d4
See below
See below
Nil
M (5'tall)
Average (8-10)
420
1-10
6
12, f1 24 (B)
3
17
2
ld3/ld3
Stinking cloud
None
Nil
M (5'tall)
Irregular (5-7)
420
earth mephit
These heavy, rocky mephits have stolid, humorless personalities.
Stubborn and immune to insult, they look like small, thin
earth elementals, with stony skin, glittering eyes, and rigid
wings of dull metal. Their wings, which never flap, seem to
play no role in the mephit's magical flight. Earth mephits fly
clumsily and smell like dirt.
combat Earth mephits have two fist attacks (ld4 damage
each). Once per day, they can grow to a height of 10' for one
turn; their fists do 2d6 damage at this size.
Three times a day an earth mephit can spit a rock at one
target within 15’ hitting automatically (1d6 damage). Additional
uses of this attack beyond the third cost the mephit 2
hp apiece from its current total.
Once per hour an earth mephit can attempt to gate in 1-2
other mephits, either earth or magma. If two arrive, they are
the same type.
Earth mephits regenerate 1 hp per round they spend
buried in earth to at least waist level. passwall and transmute
rock to mud spells destroy them instantly.
ECOLOGYE: arth mephits need no food or drink to survive, but
they enjoy the taste of gems and jewelry. To gain these they
pursue money-making schemes, always with single-mindedness
but also singular ineptitude.
ooze mephit
These unctuous creatures sidle up to strangers and, in purring,
sibilant voices, use flattery to ingratiate themselves. "Oooh,
what sssplendid armor! You know, you wear that armor with
sssuch, sssuch authority, I feel myssself quite overwhelmed."
After a few minutes of this, or as much as the target can
stand, the mephit asks for "a loan" of 100 gold pieces.
Ooze mephits are made of ochre muck, just like their home
plane. They have a rough humanoid form hut no clear joints, and
their wings are transparent green bubble membranes that seldom
break. They have dark green eyes and mouth with a mooning
expression, and they smell absolutely terrible in a 30' radius.
Contact with an ooze mephit stains clothing permanently.
COMBAT: Ooze mephits attack with two claws (ld3 damage
each), hut avoid combat when possible. Their breath weapon,
usable every other round without limit, is an invisible cloud
of gas that works as a stinking cloud (no range, 10' radius)
cast at 3rd level of magic use. Other rnephits are immune.
Once per hour an ooze mephit can gate in another ooze
mephit. Ooze mephits are immune to cutting or impaling
damage and to fire and water attacks of all types, but transmute
mud to rock destroys them instantly. They regenerate 1
hp per round in stagnant water.
eco OGY: Ooze mephits are created to clean sewage lines,
maintain garbage dumps, and carry out other necessary but
unpleasant duties. They quickly desert and become beggars.
With the money they beg, ooze mephits hire wizards to transform
them into more desirable forms: humans, elves, dwarves,
even koholds.
2 +

						FIRE				RADIANT
CLIMATE/TERRAIN			Any					Any
FREQUENCY:				Common				Common
ORGANIZATION:			Solitary			Solitariy
ACTIVITY CYCLE:			Any					Any
INTELLIGENCE:			Average (8-10)		Average (8-10
ALIGNMENT:				Neutral				Neutral
MOVEMENT:				12, FI 24 (B)		12, FI 24 (B) -
HIT DICE:				3					3
THACO:					17					17
NO. OF attacks:			2					2
damage/attack:			ld3+1 / 1d3+1		ld3 / 1d3
SPECIAL ATTACKS:		See below			Color spray
SPECIAL DEFENSES:		See below			See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE:		Nil					Nil
SIZE:					M (5’tall)			M (5’ tall)
MORALE:					Average (8-10)		Irregular (5-7)
XP VALUE:				420					420

FIRE mephit
The most mischievous of all mephits, these fiends play terrible
pranks on other mephits, such as pushing magma mephits
into water and watching them harden.
Fire mephits are small, wiry humanoids with bright red
skin and bat-wings. Some fire mephits affect a mustache,
goatee, and tiny horns on their forehead, but these are always
faked.
COMBAT. Touching a fire mephit causes 1 hp heat damage. Its
two clawed hands rake for ld3 damage each plus 1 hp heat
damage per hit.
Fire mephits can use their breath weapon three times a
day. In one form it is a flame jet 15’ long and 1 ‘ wide that automatically
hits one chosen target (1d8+ 1 damage; save vs.
breath weapon for half damage). The second form, a fan of
flame, covers a 120 arc in front of the mephit to a distance of
five feet. Any creature in the arc suffers 4 hp damage (no save].
Fire mephits can also cast magic missile (two missiles)
and heat metal spells once each per day. Once per hour a fire
mephit can attempt to gate in another mephit, either fire,
magma, smoke or steam.
ecology Fire mephits sometimes prove useful heating forges,
warming bedclothes, or lighting cigars.
’
RADIANT mephit
Prone to non sequiturs and glazed looks, radiant mephits
appear permanently, blissfully dazed by the glories of the
quasi-plane of Radiance. They peer fixedly at people and say
things like, “Have you too seen the majesty of the Ultimate
Light? Oh, look at that amazing reflection on your armor
there! Nice . . . Sorry, was I talking?” They take overblown
names as do other mephits, hut never remember them.
Radiant mephits have silvery bodies that perfectly reflect
their surroundings like a mirror, large black eyes, and thin
prismatic wings. They have wide mouths, but their faces are
usually expressionless, except during their sudden fits of
crazed giggling.
COMBAT: Radiant mephits can attack with two claws (Id3 damage
each). They can cast color spray once per turn at 6th level
of magic use. However, unless directly attacked, they usually
become distracted and forget their opponents.
Once per hour a radiant mephit can attempt to gate in
another radiant mephit.
Radiant mephits are immune to all spells that affect or
work through vision, including color spray and visual illusions,
but they receive no saving throws against mind-affecting
magic. They have infravision to 120’. In strong light they
regenerate 1 hp per turn.
ECOLOGYR: adiant mephits lack the attention span to carry out
missions. They are created primarily because some powerful
beings of lawful alignment find their color sprays (dim recreations
of the plane of Radiance) soothing or mesmerizing.
+ 73 +

mephit, water/ice
WATER ice
climate/terrain : Any Any
activity CYCLE: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Common Common
ORGANIZATIO: N Solitary Solitary
diet: Any liquid Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: N N
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
No. APPEARING: 1-10 1-10
ARMOCRL ASS: 5 5
MOVEMENT: 12, FI 24 (B) 12, FI 24 (B)
HIT DICE: 3 3
THACO: 17 17
No. OF AITACKS: 2 2
damage/attack ld3/ 1 d3 ld2/ Id2
SPECIAALI TACKS: Acid stream See below
SPECIADLE FENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5‘tall) M (5’tall)
MORALE: Average (8- 10) Average (8- 10)
XP VALUE: 420 420
WAtER mephit
These thin, finny humanoids are covered with sea-green
scales, and webs of skin connect the spines of their ears, toes,
and wings. They have fishy, staring eyes and fish lips. An
odor of brine accompanies them, and they drip salt water.
Manifesting an irritating joviality, water mephits make
remarkably tactless comments on their companions’ actions
and situations: “Buck up, you can handle these fiends. Or if
not, you’ll make good dretches.” They attach themselves to
adventuring parties (unasked) out of an appetite for novelty.
COMBAT: Water mephits can attack with two claws (ld3 damage
each), but they prefer their breath weapon, a stream of
acidic greenish water (2d4 acid damage for two rounds; one
save vs. breath weapon halves damage on both rounds). The
mephit can breathe every other round, automatically hitting
one target.
The semi-liquid forms of water mephits are immune to
cutting or impaling damage from nonmagical weapons and to
fire damage (including magical fire), but they take double
damage from cold attacks. Of course they can breathe water,
and they can drink any liquid, such as mercury or poison
without damage. They regenerate 1 hp per round spent only
drinking liquid.
Water mephits can attempt to gate in one other water or
ice mephit once per hour.
ecology Captured water mephits stand watch in kitchens,
ready to put out fires, or maintain aquaria for the wealthy.
ICE mephit
Ice mephits are angular, with translucent, ice-blue skin. They
live on the colder Lower Planes and thus never mix with fire.
magma, smoke, or steam mephits. Ice mephits act aloof and
cruel, surpassing other mephits in torture and wanton
destruction.
COMBATI:c e mephits attack with two clawed hands (Id2 damage
each). In addition, their chilling touch reduces the victim’s
attack rolls by 1 per hit. These effects are cumulative and last
three turns, or until the victim is healed to full hit points,
whichever comes first.
Ice mephits can breathe a volley of ice shards every other
melee round, up to three times per day. This volley automatically
hits a single victim within 15’ (ld6 damage, save vs.
breath weapon for half damage).
Once per hour an ice mephit can attempt to gate in one
other mephit, either mist or ice.
Ice mephits are of course immune to all cold-based
attacks, but take full damage from fire- or heat-based attacks.
ECOLOGYC: onfined ice mephits chill small rooms for the cold
storage of perishables.


me PH I t, DU st/salt
DUST SALT wet, which causes them excruciating pain and makes them
climate/terrain Any Any smell briny. The sarcastic and acidulous wit of salt mephits
FREQUENCY: Common Common Lowers their life expectancy dramatically.
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
activity CYCLE: h Y Any COMBAT: Salt mephits attack with two claws (ld3 damage
DIET: Special Nil each); if any claw damage penetrates armor, the pain of the
INTELLIGENCE: salted wound requires a save vs. petrification or the victim is
TREASURE: Nil N stunned for 1-2 rounds. Similarly, the salt mephit’s breath
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral weapon is a shower of salt crystals against a single enemy
within 15’ (damage ld4, save vs. petrification or be stunned
No. appearing: 1-10 1-10 1-2 rounds).
ARMOCRL ASS: 6 5 Once per day a salt mephit can taunt (as the 1st-level
MOVEMENT: wizard spell); this taunting can be made to originate within 10
hit DICE: 3 3 yards of the mephit. A salt mephit can contaminate any
thac0: 17 17 amount of water up to a barrel by touch, turning it into
NO. OF attacks: 2 2 undrinkable brine.
damage/attack: ld2/ld2 Once per hour a salt mephit can attempt to gate in
SPECIAALT TACKS: See below See below another salt mephit. Salt mephits are immune to fire and heat
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below damage of all kinds, but take maximum damage from liquid-
MAGICRE SISTANCE: Nil nil based attacks, and even ordinary water does 1 hp damage per
SIZE: M (5’tall) M (5’ tall) round of contact. They regenerate 1 hp per turn automatically,
MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) as long as they stay dry.
xp VALUE: 420 420
Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
12, FI 24 (B) 12, FI 24 (B)
ld3/1d3 + stun
ECOLOGY Spellcasters who deliver a nasty, foulmouthed salt
mephit to an enemy thereby declare open warfare.
dust mephit
These ghoulish things find death morbidly fascinating. They
pose as tragic yet fashionable victims of a gloomy fate, heroically
holding out against utter insanity. They favor lines like
“A dust mephit I am, lest dust I become!”
Gaunt even by mephit standards, dust mephits have
dusky brown skin, eyes, and wings. Unlike other mephits, they
prefer to wear clothing (always black), altered so as not to
interfere with flight.
COMBAT. Dust mephits attack with two weak claws (ld2 damage
each). Three times a day they can breathe a 15’-radius
cloud of imtating glassy dust (range 0). Those who fail to save
vs. breath weapon can avoid the effect by scratching for one
round. Otherwise the itching Lowers AC by 4 and attack rolls
by 2 for three rounds. Other mephits and creatures with thick
or insensitive skins (elephant, scaly, buffalo) are immune.
Once per hour a dust mephit can attempt to gate in 1-2
other dust mepbits, usually to share their tragic alienation.
They regenerate 1 hp per turn in dusty, waterless areas. They
take half damage from cutting and impaling weapons and are
immune to heat and fire damage of all types, but take maximum
damage from liquid- and wind-based attacks.
ECOLOGYI: n the complex social code of some Lower-planar
spellcasters, the gift of a dust mephit symbolizes a subtle ,
threat, with the connotation that the giver has recognized
some plot of the recipient against him.
salt mephit
Salt mephits look like grainy white humanoids with wings
made of cubical white crystals. They have large red eyes and
gaping, grinning mouths. They have no odor unless they get
.
’
-.
8

mephit, lightning/mineral
FREQUENCY: Common Common
ORGANIZATIO: N Solitary/band Solitary
DIET: Special Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Avg (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil N
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
activity CYCLE: Any Any
No. APPEARING:
ARMOCRL ASS:
MOVEMENT:
HIT DICE:
THACO:
No. OF attacks:
damage/attack :
SPECIAALT TACKS:
SPECIADLE FENSES:
magic RESISTANCE:
MORALE:
XP VALUE:
SIZE:
1-20
4
12, F1 36 (C)
3
7
2
ld3/1d3
Lightning bolt
See below
Nil
M (5‘ tall)
Average (8- 10)
420
1-20
4
12, FI 24 (C)
3+2
17
2
ld4/ Id4
Glitterdust
See below
Nil
M (5’tall)
Average (8-10)
420
lightning mephit
A lightning mephit’s torso and limbs are thin, jagged bolts of
black lightning; its hands and feet are oversized, bulbous, and
white. Its earless head smells like ozone and glows with a permanent
light spell-like effect that cannot be dispelled; this
expires when the mephit dies.
A lightning mephit has no wings. It races through the air
like a lightning bolt, the fastest of all mephits. Unfortunately,
it maneuvers poorly.
Lightning mephits are energetic, even hyperactive, with
an incessant curiosity and desire for activity. They talk very,
very fast, with many mistakes, false starts, and malapropisms.
COMBAT: Lightning mephits dislike combat and prefer to
befriend opponents. They have no claws but have the spelllike
ability to cast a lightning bolt three times a day. Unlike
the wizard spell, this bolt does 3d6 damage automatically to
one target within 80’. A mephit can cast additional bolts, hut
each extra bolt damages the mephit (2 hp from its current
total per bolt cast).
Once per hour a lightning mephit can attempt to gate in
1-4 more lightning mephits.
Attacks with nonmagical metal weapons on a lightning
mephit do it no harm but, may harm the attacker (save vs.
paralysis or take ld3 shock damage). Lightning mephits are
immune to tire, heat, and electrical damage of all kinds, but
dousing with liquid (at least a gallon) destroys them in a flash
(3 hp damage to everyone in a 5’ radius).
Lightning mephits instantly regenerate all damage on
contact with an electrical source, such as another mephit’s
lightning bolt. This reinforces the mephit’s natural desire to
congregate with others of its kind. A force of mephits that can
recharge one another is unstoppable by anything short of a
glass of water.
phit
These thickly-built mephits look like earth mephits. Their skin
and wings glitter with ground mica. The rigid metallic wings
have no obvious function in the mephit’s magical flight. Like
their earthy kin, mineral mephits are clumsy in flight. They
have no odor.
These suspicious, greedy, and self-righteous mephits
show an attitude common in their native plane of Minerals:
They style themselves guards of all treasure, whether or not
they own it.
COMBAT: Mineral mepbits attack with two claws (Id4 damage
each). Their breath weapon works as glitterdust (no range, 10’
radius) three times a day at 3rd level of magic use. They can
move through stone walls less than a foot thick as though
insubstantial.
Once per hour, mineral mephits can attempt to gate in 1-
2 other mephits, either earth or mineral. If two arrive, they are
the same type.
Mineral mephits do not breathe and are immune to gas
attacks of all kinds. Vacuum and nonmagical impaling weapons
do no damage. Passwall or transmute rock to mud
destroys them instantly.
Mineral mephits regenerate 1 hp per turn in contact with
stone. Gems and jewelry also restore hit points but are consumed
in the process, 10 gp of value lost per hp restored.
+ 76 +
-1 .L


climate/terrain :
FREQUENCY:
ACTIVITCYYC LF:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:
ORGANIZATION:
MAGMA
Common
Solitary
Special
N
Neutral
Any
Any
Low (5-7)
ASH
Common
Solitary
Special
Average (8-10)
Nil
Neutral
Any
Any
No. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:
HIT DICE:
THACO:
NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAALT TACKS:
SPECIADLE FENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:
SIZE:
MORALE:
XP VALUE:
1
6
12, FI 24 (C)
3
17
2
ld8+ 1/1d8+ 1
Breath, heat
Regenerates
Nil
M (5’tall)
Average (8-10)
420
1
5
12, F1 24 (B)
3
17
2
ld3/ ld3
Belabormen t
See below
Nil
M (5‘ tall)
Average (8- I0)
420
magma mephit
Magma mephits, or lava mephits, are the least intelligent of
all mephits and hence the brunt of fire mephit jokes. They are
sensitive to these insults and anger easily when offended, but
otherwise they are passive and less temperamental than other
mephits. They generate extreme heat that can be felt 30’
away.
combat: Magma mephit claws are small and soft, causing only
1 hp damage when they hit, but each hit inflicts an additional
Id8 heat damage and automatically melts or bums most nonmagical
materials. The rate of destruction varies from three
rounds (melting plate armor) to one hour (burning through an
inch of wood).
Their breath weapon, usable once every three rounds, is a
blob of lava that automatically hits one target within 10’ (Id6
damage). A magma mephit can use this weapon eight times,
then must recharge for one hour in a lava pool. Mephits in
lava regenerate 2 hp per round.
Magma mephits can shapechange into a pool of lava 3’ in
diameter and six inches deep. This maneuver does not
recharge their breath weapon. They take damage normally in
Once per hour a magma mephit can attempt to gate in
1-2 other mephits of fire, magma, smoke, or steam. If two
arrive they are the same type.
Water in large quantities (a barrel or more) causes the
magma mephit to harden, halving its movement. However,
this releases large quantities of sulfurous steam, necessitating
a save vs. poison for any creatures within 10‘. Failure causes
dizziness and nausea for two rounds, and the victim takes -2
on attack rolls.
pool form.
ASH mephit
Profoundly depressed and lugubrious, ash mephits make adequate
sentries and messengers, but they impose upon
passersby with endless tales of their sorrows, boredom, and
frustrations.
Ash mephits have powdery gray skin and wings (“You’re
so lucky not to have wings, they get fouled in everything and
it’s not like I ever asked to fly”), no external ears (“And even
so I hear this persistent ringing, a ringing, you know, it just
never stops”), and a nasal whining voice (“Am 1 boring you?
I’d haaate to think I was boring you”). Scholars suppose that
Lower-planar beings can create ash mephits more easily than
those of other types: why else would anyone create one?
COMBAT: Ash mephits cannot claw or bite, but they can spray a
cloud of choking ash in a 10’ radius at a cost of 1 hp from
their current total (ld6 damage, save vs. breath weapons for
half damage).
Once per day an ash mephit can harangue good and neutral
creatures with a lengthy recitation of its woes. This works
as Leomund’s lamentable belaborment (It does not work on
evil creatures, who care nothing for the mephit’s troubles.)
Ash mephits are immune to nonmagical cutting and
impaling weapons, to fire, heat, and cold (magical and nonmagical),
and to poison. They take double damage from liquid-
based attacks, and wind-based attacks inflict maximum
damage. They do not breathe.
can gate in another ash
mephit (usual
Once an hour an ash
hr

Mist STEAM
climate/terrain Any Any
FREQUENCY: Common Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
activity CYCLE: Any Any
diet: Special Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
treasure: N N x 2
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
No. APPEARING: 1-10 1-10
armor CLASS: 7 7
MOVEMENT: 12, F1 24 (B) 12, FI 24 (B)
hit DICE: 3+2 3+3
thac0: 17 17
no. OF ATTACKS: 2 2
damage/attack: 1/1 ld4+ l/ld4+ 1
SPECIAALTT ACKS: See below See below
SPECIADLE FENSES: See below See below
magic RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5’tall) M (5‘tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 420 420
Both mist and steam mephits originate on the quasielemental
Plane of Steam, the only known plane that has spawned two
varieties of mephits. Possibly for this reason, the two varieties
have developed an intense rivalry bordering on hatred. They
insult one another constantly and fight inconclusive skirmishes.
mist mephit
Mist mephits fancy themselves spies of the highest caliber.
They quickly report other mephits who show mercy or other
treasonous behavior, and they seldom engage in idle banter
with other mephits.
Mist mephits can see clearly in fog or mist. Their skin is
pale green.
combat Mist mephits seldom engage in melee unless trapped.
Their soft claws inflict 1 hp damage. They can breathe a
sickly-green ball of mist every other round, up to three times
an hour, that automatically envelops one victim within 10‘
(save vs. poison or take ld4+1 points of choking damage and
blinded for 1-4 rounds).
Mist mephits can create a wall of fog once per day, as a
3rd-level wizard. They can also assume gaseous form once per
day, and often do so to spy on others or escape combat. Once
per hour, a mist mephit can attempt to gate in 1-2 other
mephits, either ice or mist. If two arrive, they are the same type.
Powerful winds, including a gust of wind spell, cause
mist mephits to flee in confusion.
steam mephit
Bossy and hypeisensitive, steam mephits are the selfappointed
overlords of all mephits and, in their own minds,
lords of the quasiplane of Steam. Mist mephits refuse to obey
them, and this disobedience has led to a millennia-long
rivalry between the types.
In addition to the hissing steam that escapes from their
pores, steam mephits leave a trail of near-boiling water where
they walk.
combat: Unlike other mephits who delay attacking as long as
possible, steam mephits, ruled by oversized egos, ambush
even large, well-armed parties. They strike first with their
boiling rainstorm, then concentrate their breath weapons on
the nearest wizard or priest.
The mephit’s two hardened claws cause ld4 damage
each, plus 1 hp heat damage per touch. In addition, the victim
is 50% likely to be stunned for one round. These effects are
cumulative, so a victim raked twice could be stunned for two
rounds.
Steam mephits can breathe a scalding jet of water every
other round with a 20’ range, automatically hitting one target
(ld3 damage, with a 50% chance of stunning the victim for
one round).
Once per day a steam mephit can create a rainstorm of
boiling water over a 20’x20’ area. This storm inflicts 2d6 damage
to all victims in the area of effect. Steam mephits can also
use putrefy food & drink (reverse of purify food and drink)
once per day to contaminate water.
Once per hour a steam mephit can attempt to gate in 1-2
other mephits (fire, magma, smoke, or steam). If two arrive,
they are the same type.
Steam mephits are immune to fire and heat damage.
ECOLOGYS:t eam mephits heat confined areas qr power small
engines.

